---
published: false
---

# In the future everyone will be discriminated against for 15 minutes

A few days ago, my boss noticed that Amazon was offering him a much higher price for the same product than us underlings. Yesterday a friend observed that it's possible to reliably estimate someone's political affiliation from publicly available data. If you had Facebook or Google or Amazon's cooperation (and for the record Facebook shares no information on specific individuals, at least that I've seen), it would not be difficult for a store to offer a higher price to republicans, or environmentalists, or people called Dave.

As I understand it, current law makes discrimination against specific kinds of groups illegal. But shopkeepers and the like enjoy the right to treat specific individuals differently, for any reason other than membership of these groups; if you want to refuse service to Bob because he looks scruffy, or slept with your girlfriend, that's your right. US employment law as I understand it is stricter: if some factor is correlated with membership of a protected category, then you may only use this factor in hiring decisions if it is demonstrably related to the specific job you're hiring for. (Given that, in the age of big data, correlations can be found between approximately any pair of factors, it seems like this makes it illegal to base hiring decisions on anything other than job-related factors? Which is not unreasonable, but seems like a huge broadening of the intended scope of the law in question).

This was probably a pragmatic option at the time. A human shopkeeper can only judge by what they can see; the only categories they can treat differently are those that are clearly visible. It's easy to discriminate by ethnicity or sex or age or disability, and you can make a decent guess at sexuality or transsexuality. Interestingly we don't consider social class to be a protected category - perhaps because it's difficult to define objectively, perhaps because we feel there's something fair in discriminating on grounds of wealth (which is at least closely correlated with class) in a way that there isn't for other categories.

Interestingly, subculture membership is also easy to discriminate by. One can certainly imagine a shopkeeper refusing to serve Goths, or those in hoodies; the former would be socially unacceptable but the latter less so, perhaps because there is the fig leaf that this is about the ease of concealing stolen goods, 