---
published: false
---

Many mathematics students have disproportionate trouble with non-standard analysis. The concepts are not difficult; indeed, they align with many freshmen's naive intuitions about calculus: there's a new kind of number, infinitesimals; any number of infinitesimals will never add up to an ordinary positive number; an infinitesimal squared is doubly infinitesimal, and so on. But paradoxically it's *because* these ideas are so obvious that they're so difficult to accept - to get to this stage, the student has spent months beating them out of himself, in favour of the rigorous Weierstraussian notion of limits of epsilons and deltas. He scoffs at the very notion of infinitesimals - the very idea! - with the righteous zeal of the fresh convert. Small wonder that he has difficulty taking these freshly-crushed ideas seriously.

So too, I think, it is with essentialism - the misguided philosophical notion that a thing's identity is defined by its attributes, or even that the very concept of identity is well-defined. To the naive student, it seems obvious what is and isn't a [sandwich](https://medium.com/@kmikeym/is-this-a-sandwich-50b1317eb3f5) - and even if we haven't thought about it explicitly, we assume there's some Platonic definition of a sandwich "out there", declaring once and for all precisely what is and isn't a sandwich. And of course the slightly more experienced student realises that this is nonsense; there's no sharp line between a sandwich and a wrap, or mammal and bird, or even alive and dead. Instead, operational definitions take precedence: if you want to 

Early this year, when asking which scientific idea should be retired, Richard Dawkins, writing in the Guardian, suggested (essentialism)[http://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jan/12/what-scientific-idea-is-ready-for-retirement-edge-org]. It's easy to see why;