---
published: false
---

Action! And not before time. There are many strands to *Gundam*, but the most fundamental is very simple: giant robot fights are cool. And while this iteration is not the hardest of sci-fi, the 3D tactics shown are at least somewhat plausible, adding up to some quite satisfying fight choreography. Admittedly we already see a powerful beam weapon that undermines the more interesting physical combat - something that will come to mar the late-series fights, and especially those of the sequel series.

But a more important flaw is already starting to make itself apparent: teenage drama and philosophising can stretch effortlessly to 50 episodes (just look at *Kimi ni Todoke* or, heck, *Haruhi*). But a combat show - really any show where conflicts are genuine and fundamental rather than miscommunications - immediately runs into problems: to make fights meaningful, losing must have consequences. If defeated enemies simply return next week, we're reduced to the silliness of e.g. *Star Driver*, *Pretty Cure*, or even *Pokemon*'s Team Rocket - at best we get a fun episodic show, but no sense of meaning or progress. If we introduce a new opponent every few weeks, we get a different problem of meaninglessness: there's no time to characterize these opponents fully. Sports animé love tournament arcs, which at least allow a "big boss" opponent to build up by defeating others, and give a plausible justification for why our heroes would be facing several different foes in a row. But in a show that's intended to be "real" there's usually no reason for the bad guys to be fighting each other, so we tend to end up with a story of an overarching evil organization represented by a series of relatively unimportant individuals. Taken to the extreme we get e.g. *Noir*, where the protagonists kill dozens of opponents each episode - but this necessarily reduces those enemies to faceless mooks.

Nikolai totally gay for Athrun - calling his name all the time.