---
published: false
---

Board gaming needs a *Flappy Bird*.

I've been thinking about board game mechanics since watching [this fascinating talk](http://vimeo.com/82383614) from the creator of Risk Legacy. I applaud Daviai's willingness to experiment with new mechanics, but the legacy design is exactly the opposite of what appeals to me in gaming. Games are almost by definition a circumscribed activity: you fight viciously while the contest is ongoing, but eventually someone wins, someone loses, and you put it back in the box and go back to being friends. Early cultures developed games as a substitute for fighting, and this was probably the key reason: they create a kind of liminal zone in which you can compete with each other while at the same time knowing that it's only a game, your true friendship remains unshaken. Some of the most enduring games even have multiple levels of this: one might play *knucklebones* for an evening and that's a game. But each toss of the bones is also circumscribed even within the game, so the game's actually a sequence of much smaller games. *Go* doesn't make this kind of explicit distinction, but it can feel similar: the game itself is a composite of hundreds of smaller battles, and the strategic choice of which regions to contest is just as important as the tactical choices of how to do so.

*Keyflower* is one of the more interesting titles of the present golden age. With its colonial-pastoral theme and indirect competition through auctions, it's like the distilled essence of the "eurogame". For those who subscribe to the notion that board games are about evaluating, making tough choices, this is perfection: what this game does is make you decide, turn after turn, what certain things are worth to you. The themeing is pretty enough, but fundamentally it's nothing more than a repeated auction.

I'm not sure how to improve on this when even *Keyflower* is sometimes criticized as "too euro". The distinction is normally one of themeing, but  I guess the non-euro mechanic is guessing what your opponents are doing, bluffing and the like.